document using ldb to drop rocksdb column families for downgrade scenarios #26284 (#26424)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/running-validator/validator-troubleshoot.md

- [Core software repo](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana)

Can't find what you're looking for? Send an email to ryan@solana.com or reach out to @rshea\#2622 on Discord.

## Blockstore

The validator blockstore rocksdb database can be inspected using the `ldb` tool.
`ldb` is part of the `rocksdb` code base and is also available in the `rocksdb-tools`
package.

## Downgrade

If a new column family has been introduced to the validator blockstore a
subsequent downgrade of the validator to a version prior to the version where

> the new column family was intoduced will cause the validator to fail during
> startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the new column family was introduced will cause the validator to fail while
opening the blockstore during startup.
```

List column families:
```
ldb --db=<validator ledger path>/rocksdb/ list_column_families
```

> **Warning**: Please seek guidance on discord before modifying the validator

Reviewer: i see you didn't volunteer your discord handle here to direct support inquiries! :sweat_smile:

- [Core software repo](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana)

Can't find what you're looking for? Send an email to ryan@solana.com or reach out to @rshea\#2622 on Discord.

## Blockstore

The validator blockstore rocksdb database can be inspected using the `ldb` tool.
`ldb` is part of the `rocksdb` code base and is also available in the `rocksdb-tools`
package.

[RocksDB Administration and Data Access Tool](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Administration-and-Data-Access-Tool)

> 

Reviewer 2: For completeness, we could add a section about upgrade (which we handle automatically). Doing so might also help illuminate how an upgrade/downgrade sequence puts blockstore into bad state for old software.
```
## Upgrade

If a new software version introduces a new column family to the blockstore,
that new (empty) column will automatically be created. This is the same logic
that allows a validator to start without the blockstore directory.
```

## Downgrade

If a new column family has been introduced to the validator blockstore a
subsequent downgrade of the validator to a version prior to the version where

> the new column family was introduced will cause the validator to fail while

Reviewer 2: nit: "to a version prior to the version where the new column family was introduced will" ==> "to a version that predates the new column family will ..."

My attempt to make it slightly less wordy, feel free to ignore if you like what you already have more.
